Iris ❤ Xarray docs page. (#5025)
SciTools/iris: docs/src/techpapers/iris_xarray.rst

.. include:: ../common_links.inc

======================
Iris ❤️ :term:`Xarray`
======================

There is a lot of overlap between Iris and :term:`Xarray`, but some important
differences too. Below is a summary of the most important differences, so that
you can be prepared, and to help you choose the best package for your use case.

> Overall Experience

Reviewer: It'd be nice to point out that it can be easy to convert between the two.

Author: 3277288c1475f98aa12c12e30f6c1107b96316a4

Xarray's more generic data model and community-driven development give it a
richer range of operations and broader possible uses. Using Xarray
specifically for meteorology/climatology may require deeper knowledge
compared to using Iris, and you may prefer to add Xarray plugins
such as :ref:`cfxarray` to get the best experience. Advanced users can likely
achieve better performance with Xarray than with Iris.

Regridding
----------
Iris and Xarray offer a range of regridding methods - both natively and via
additional packages such as `iris-esmf-regrid`_ and `xESMF`_ - which overlap
in places
but tend to cover a different set of use cases (e.g. Iris handles unstructured
meshes but offers access to fewer ESMF methods). The behaviour of these
regridders also differs slightly (even between different regridders attached to
the same package) so the appropriate package to use depends highly on the
particulars of the use case.

Plotting
--------
Xarray and Iris have a large overlap of functionality when creating
:term:`Matplotlib` plots and both support the plotting of multidimensional
coordinates. This means the experience is largely similar using either package.

> Xarray supports further plotting backends (such as `seaborn`_, `hvPlot`_, etc)
> and, if a user is already familiar with `pandas`_, the interface should be
> familiar. It also supports some different plot types to Iris, and therefore can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Xarray supports further plotting backends through external packages (e.g. Bokeh through `hvPlot`_)
and, if a user is already familiar with `pandas`_, the interface should be
familiar. It also supports some different plot types to Iris, and therefore can
```

Some of  our  API is inspired by Seaborn but we don't directly call seaborn for anything.

be used for a wider variety of plots. It also has benefits regarding "out of
the box", quick customisations to plots. However, if further customisation is
required, knowledge of matplotlib is still required.

In both cases, :term:`Cartopy` is/can be used. Iris does more work
automatically for the user here, creating Cartopy
:class:`~cartopy.mpl.geoaxes.GeoAxes` for latitude and longitude coordinates,
whereas the user has to do this manually in Xarray.

Statistics
----------
Both libraries are quite comparable with generally similar capabilities,
performance and laziness. Iris offers more specificity in some cases, such as
some more specific unique functions and masked tolerance in most statistics.
Xarray seems more approachable however, with some less unique but more
convenient solutions (these tend to be wrappers to :term:`Dask` functions).

Laziness and Multi-Processing with :term:`Dask`
-----------------------------------------------
Iris and Xarray both support lazy data and out-of-core processing through
utilisation of Dask.

In general, Xarray exposes Dask and :term:`NumPy` conveniences at the API
level, whereas Iris takes an opinionated approach with no explicit API

> controls.

Reviewer: May be nice to add an example here.

Author: c2aa94d7abebaafee520e17a716c09aefcd1f68b

Xarray has a level of interoperability with Dask and NumPy that is not
available with Iris, specifically with regards to `NEP-18`_ and passing

> :class:`xarray.DataArray`\ s to Dask.

Reviewer: > Xarray has a level of interoperability with Dask and NumPy

Is this statement correct about other ["duck array types"](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/internals/duck-arrays-integration.html) too like pydata/sparse, cupy etc?

> passing :class:`xarray.DataArray`\ s to Dask

I'm not sure what you're referring to here.

Author: c2aa94d7abebaafee520e17a716c09aefcd1f68b
